.TH JOURNALCTL 1 "2025" "initd 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
journalctl \- query system logs with systemd-compatible interface
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B journalctl
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B journalctl
is a wrapper script that queries traditional syslog files using a
systemd-compatible interface. It provides familiar journalctl options
while working with standard syslog infrastructure (rsyslog, syslog-ng, etc.).
.PP
Logs are read from
.I /var/log/messages
and filtered according to the specified options.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-unit =\fIUNIT\fR
Show logs for the specified unit. Short names without an extension default
to
.IR .service .
Explicit extensions are preserved
.RI ( .timer ,
.IR .socket ,
.IR .target ).
.IP
The unit file must exist in one of the configured unit directories.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-follow
Follow the log output, similar to
.BR "tail \-f" .
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-reverse
Show newest entries first (reverse chronological order).
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-lines =\fIN\fR
Show the last
.I N
lines. Default is 100.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-priority =\fIPRIORITY\fR
Filter by syslog priority. Valid values are:
.BR emerg " (0),"
.BR alert " (1),"
.BR crit " (2),"
.BR err " (3),"
.BR warning " (4),"
.BR notice " (5),"
.BR info " (6),"
.BR debug " (7)."
Shows all messages at the specified priority and higher.
.TP
.BI \-\-since= TIME
Show entries since the specified time.
Format: YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS
.TP
.BI \-\-until= TIME
Show entries until the specified time.
Format: YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-boot
Show logs from the current boot. Uses
.I /var/run/utmp
to determine boot time.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-pager
Do not pipe output into a pager. By default, output is piped to
.BR less (1)
or
.BR more (1)
if available.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help message and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Show version information and exit.
.SH UNIT DIRECTORIES
.B journalctl
searches the following directories for unit files (in order):
.IP \(bu 4
.I /etc/initd/system
.IP \(bu 4
.I /lib/initd/system
.IP \(bu 4
.I /etc/systemd/system
.IP \(bu 4
.I /lib/systemd/system
.SH LOG FORMAT
Logs are expected in standard syslog format with unit names in brackets:
.PP
.EX
    Oct  6 12:34:56 hostname supervisor[123]: [nginx.service] Server started
.EE
.SH EXAMPLES
Show logs for nginx.service:
.PP
.EX
    journalctl \-u nginx
.EE
.PP
Follow logs for a specific timer:
.PP
.EX
    journalctl \-u backup.timer \-f
.EE
.PP
Show last 50 lines, newest first:
.PP
.EX
    journalctl \-r \-n 50
.EE
.PP
Show only error priority and above:
.PP
.EX
    journalctl \-p err
.EE
.PP
Show logs from current boot:
.PP
.EX
    journalctl \-b
.EE
.PP
Combine unit filter with follow mode:
.PP
.EX
    journalctl \-u sshd.socket \-f
.EE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/log/messages
Default system log file
.TP
.I /var/run/utmp
Used to determine boot time for
.B \-\-boot
option
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success
.TP
.B 1
Error (invalid arguments, unit not found, log file missing)
.SH NOTES
This is a compatibility wrapper that provides a journalctl-like interface
to traditional syslog files. It does not use the systemd journal format.
.PP
Time filtering
.RB ( \-\-since ,
.BR \-\-until )
uses basic string comparison and may not handle all date formats correctly.
.PP
The
.B \-\-boot
option uses
.I /var/run/utmp
which may not be available on all systems.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR init (8),
.BR supervisor-slave (8),
.BR rsyslogd (8),
.BR syslog (3),
.BR initctl (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Written by DJ Lucas.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2025 DJ Lucas.
.br
License: MIT
