.TH IFDOWN 8 "2025" "initd 0.1" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
ifdown \- bring down a network interface
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ifdown
.I interface
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ifdown
brings down a network interface by stopping its corresponding network service
unit. The interface must have a configuration file in
.IR /etc/initd/sysconfig .
.PP
This command is a convenience wrapper around
.BR initctl (1)
that stops the templated network service for the specified interface.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I interface
The name of the network interface to bring down (e.g., eth0, wlan0).
.SH CONFIGURATION
Each interface requires a configuration file at:
.PP
.EX
    /etc/initd/sysconfig/network-\fIINTERFACE\fR.conf
.EE
.PP
The configuration file specifies the network service type and parameters.
See
.BR ifup (8)
for supported service types.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Interface brought down successfully
.TP
.B 1
Error (missing interface name, configuration file not found, or service failed to stop)
.SH EXAMPLES
Bring down eth0:
.PP
.EX
    ifdown eth0
.EE
.PP
Bring down wireless interface:
.PP
.EX
    ifdown wlan0
.EE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/initd/sysconfig/network-*.conf
Network interface configuration files
.SH NOTES
The interface configuration file must exist before running
.BR ifdown .
If the service is not running, this command may have no effect.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ifup (8),
.BR initctl (1),
.BR init (8),
.BR supervisor-worker (8)
.SH AUTHOR
Written by DJ Lucas.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2025 DJ Lucas.
.br
License: MIT
